### Making moral decisions

So, are ethics about choices, or outcomes? Rules or consequences? 

MIT are trying to build a picture of moral acceptability with their crowdsourcing [moral machine](https://www.moralmachine.net/) project in which you are presented with multiple scenarios (like driverless car choices) in which you decide the path the vehicle should take, usually resulting in somebody or something dying. It is easy to become quickly abstracted from the awfulness of the choices you make in this game.

Guidelines in ethical frameworks for machine choices are broadly divided into four categories:

* Do good
* Minimise harm
* Respect human autonomy
* Be just or fair

Someone should tell Peugeot about the third one. My wife's 2008 has a really irritating habit of grabbing the wheel if you change lanes without indicating, thinking that you've fallen asleep. I haven't found a way of switching that off yet, but it is really disconcerting, especially on a long trip at night with no other vehicles around.

Transparency of the algorithm and accountability are increasingly being emphasised. These frameworks have become regarded as inadequate as they offer a way for corporations to hide behind them in what is called, "ethics washing". This is a problem for all rules or specifications, or checklists. 

#### Decision-making in Scottish Teacher Education
In my own application, teacher education[^1-tt], the [GTCS Professional Standards](https://www.gtcs.org.uk/professional-standards/standards-for-registration.aspx) are meant to provide an objective benchmark that describes the competencies and skills of all teachers in Scotland. We know that the application of these standards is in the hands of the profession itself and therefore wildly variable in their interpretation. The standards themselves are written in ambiguous and wishy-washy language, like most things in state-provisioned education, and so are highly subjective and open to -- interpretation or abuse, depending on your view of an individual situation. 

> "*Universal law is for lackeys. Context is for kings.*" --Lorca [@Goldsman2019]

[^1-tt]: We don't like "teacher training" because we like to think that teaching is a profession, like the law, or the military. It isn't, of course, but we sustain the pretence for ourselves, even if nobody else in society beleives it.

#### Moral decision-making applied to data ethics

A couple of questions are asked in a section making the links between moral decision making and data ethics. The first, "*Should we require people to give their DNA to a gene bank?*", screams at me, perhaps because of my age and the closeness people of my age have, although not by first-hand experience, of the horrors of the Second World War. Everything about centralised reporting of ethnicity makes me recoil: I never provide information about my ethnicity, and I would need a very good reason before I ever did. We are forgetting: something that gets me in trouble almost every year, with very real regret and a deepening sense of injustice[^11-11].

The second question relates to social media and their handling of "hate speech". This is topical: I have just deleted my personal Facebook account[^ayb] after they, once again, dismissed my objections to posts intended to whip up hatred of muslims, or other racial or ethnic groupings. In every case I have raised, the posts have not been found to breach codes of conduct, illustrating what is described as ethical washing (see above). To my cost -- I have cut off friends and family with whom I am only connected this way -- I have deleted my account.

[^ayb]: I am keeping, uncomfortably, a couple of social media accounts going that are related to my media and technical interests. Incidentally, I also deleted my personal Twitter account, but not for this reason. I'm generally a bit fed up with the whole Internet at the moment.

[^11-11]: When I call people out for their disrepect of the remembrance observation, it is always me that is critiqued for not being kind, or collegiate. People can be so ungrateful and selfish. The injustice of such treatment makes me wonder.
