## What are ethics?

A branch of moral philosophy: a codification of habits that are valued within the context of a culture: ergo, no right or wrong answers, just human custom. *Normative* ethics are those that define what we *ought* to do, without concerning themselves with what we *actually* do. Within that class of ethics are 3 persepctives on how we should act:

Deontological ethics (rules)
: rules of duty and obligation -- perhaps universally agreed upon, like not killing each other, or hurting animals. Some things are always right, others, always wrong, no matter the consequences.

Teleological ethics (consequences)
: focus on the outcome of actions -- actions for the greater good, perhaps, or the end justifying the means. *Consequentialism* is the view that the moral quality of a choice is decided solely by its outcome.

Virtue ethics
: are about judgement of people's character or moral fibre.

The obvious issue here is that life is complicated, isn't it? We can't make a simple set of rules because the complexity of life requires us to make choices sometimes that go against those simple rules for a better end. Is there any point, then, in having rules in the first place? Well, clearly, because we want everyone else to make choices that don't harm or disadvantage us.

### The trolley problem

Scenario 1
: A runaway train is travelling on a railway track towards 5 people. You can't warn them, but there is a lever that you can operate to switch the tracks. The problem is that there is a person on the other track. **Do you pull the lever or not?**

Scenario 2
: As above, but now there are no points – instead, a large person standing a bridge over the tracks. **Do you push Fatty into the path of the train to save the five?**

I chose yes in both scenarios.

> "The needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few." -- Spock

Interstingly, although I was with the majority in the first scenario, I was in the minority in the second. I don't understand this difference, except for the difference between operating a control like the lever, and physically acting on another human being -- the former seems less connected to the action, perhaps.

Other scenarios
: How does the trolley problem change when the 5 are convicted rapists? Children? When Fatty is a scientist working on a cure for Leukemia? When the 5 are Mountain People (insert your own other-class of person)? Tories? Welsh? Rednecks?
