## Legal and ethical considerations

### Legal

Well, let's not pretend that there's much of a connection between law and morality. Laws are instruments of power. They belong to the powerful. Even at mate's rates, a lawyer's fees are vulgar and shameless. Even if it were accessible by the common people, legal decisions have always been historically hysterical, wildly inconsistent and woefully inadequate. It's noticeable that the great democratisers of the law have been people like Napolen and Hitler. It's about time we replaced the whole system with a machine.

> "*The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.*" -- Henry VI, Part 2, Act IV, Scene 2 -@Shakespeare

The laws of the land are the first and greatest example of what the course describes as "ethics washing", the practice of corporations who create "codes" to *lure the public into a false sense of security and earn undeserved trust*. Laws make us feel safe but do nothing to make us safe as enforcement and monitoring are lacking.

In the same way that the discussion in the course speaks of ethics guidelines being used by companies "to ward off regulation by the state through formal laws", so government uses laws to ward off revolution and disorder.

There is a tension in data ethics between the need and cost of self-regulatory codes of conduct, and external regulation through the courts. The course summarises data ethics and the law:

Hard ethics 
: is needed to understand and interpret laws, and to make sure legislation is followed.

Soft ethics
: are normative rules that tell us how to behave morally, whether the law addresses our actions or context.

Compliance with the law 
: is normally necessary for ethically correct conduct, but may not be enough for it.

