
### Ethical? Nothing ethical going on here.

I skimmed the transcript of the role-play presented by the course (I am out of week already) and also the discussion on the ethics of setting cookies for the participants of ths MOOC. Much angst, I see.

Tracking is an issue for me and therefore I take steps to mitigate it. I don't allow setting of third-party cookies, and have a policy of clearing all cookies on exit from a browser session. I also use different browsers. Tracking is difficult under those circumstances: this is working for me. How do I know? When I get advertising, it's usually totally irrelevant, which gives me some comfort, but I'm not complacent about it. I hate advertising: it's one of the manifestations of what is truly awful about human beings.

Solutions like the GDPR persmissions dialogues are no better than the advertising itself. They doesn't solve any problems, they just gets in the way and decrease the chances of me using the sites that push them into my face. I make use of ad blockers, brutal cookie policy, and text readers when using the web.

Interestingly, the link to the EC directive yields a 404 (not found) error. The [EdX FAQ](https://support.edx.org/hc/en-us/articles/360004449033-Frequently-Asked-Questions-FAQs-about-GDPR) is a good example of the dishonest corporate response to such issues: it presents questions "frequently asked" by users which it doesn't answer.

One of the difficulties of this dominance of the common habit of making a website, for whatever reason, of the legal constraints is that the people that benefit most from this are lawyers. They get fat on the friction of common activities. I have been making websites since the early 1980s before anyone knew what the WorldWide Web was. Most of them are *pro bono* educational sites, or services for the common good. Some have been for profit but not in the "YouTuber" sense: I have charged fees to compensate for the time it has taken. That time has not included exhaustive compliance checking with the various laws and expectations. I have always worked on the basis that I haven't got any money, so am not worth pursuing in litigation. So far, so good.

At no point has it been made clear why cookies are necessary. Disabling cookies on the EdX site results in denial of access immediately on refreshing the page. So, the first purpose is to grant access to the site (which can be done in other ways easily enough, and more securely).
