## Design Solutions

> *This is what this course aims to do: encourage you to reflect how your design choices can shape your users and society.*

I think I am beginning to see the aims and purposes of this course more clearly: to help us see what is in plain sight and already in our experience, although forgotten. Systems are powerful in that they influence behaviour of those who interact with them. Culture is a system in this regard, therefore. Societal norms have aye been manipulated by those who seek power: the information media of the time have been crucial in adjusting those norms. Today's situation is no different: truth is hidden to enhance the message, whether for marketing or political ends. The defence is simple enough: to be informed, and to be educated[^note-3-03-1].

[^note-3-03-1]: I'm not talking about education in the school or systemic sense here. I mean that to be educated is to know much, to have read much, travelled much and thought much about events, most particularly those of recent history. Sound technical knowledge is included in that definition too.

### Designing for values

Lessig describes constitution as "not just a legal text but a way of life -- that structures and constrains social and legal power, to the end of protecting fundamental values" (@Lessig2006, p.19). The characterisation of "code is law" as originally presented [@Lessing2000] and in the more recent version [@Lessig2006], interestingly dedicated to Wikipedia, underlines the point above: the parts of a system manifest and make its character: the course notes suggest that because of this, by whom and how systems are built are not just technical matters but rather "societal, ethical and political". 

Values must be considered by the designers of a system: the example of a laptop camera with a built-in privacy shutter is presented to illustrate this. GDPR tries to mandate this because users are incapable of understanding the systems they are using and make choices to protect themselves from using systems that may be harmful to them. 

A difficulty arises when such systems replace services which might be considered basic needs: for example, it is a legal right to know how your pay packet has been calculated and yet employers hide this information behind access barriers like online pay systems. Pension providers, too, require their pensioners to be computer literate, online and savvy in order to access their own pensions. Today's letter from [USS](https://www.uss.co.uk/) advises that "in the future, all your documents will be online 24/7 -- no more lost paper". These abuses of power don't even try to be honest about the reasons for such a move: and the designers of that system will have a set of values to embed within their system that have nothing to do with the needs of their customers. Even writing that sentence is difficult because the customer (I was going to write client) is no longer the person for whom the service is providing.

Faced with such powerlessness in the face of innovation, the individual is unable to defend themselves against the abuses of it. Government regulation is not much more than ethics washing.

#### Making improvements
My post, under the heading "Education", suggests this:

> "People are more likely to make more circumspect use of smart tech if they know what is does, what is might do, and how to prevent it. A simple example is setting your browser to block third-party cookies, employing an ad blocker, and similar tools."


