# Week 4: Money and Markets

The introduction to this week starts out with a new context: *the algorithmic economy*. Three questions offer a framework for our enquiry, presented as "fundamental ethical questions". The first, in my view, is not an ethical question at all but a political one, that of how wealth ought to be distributed. Either I still am not understanding the meaning of the word, *ethics*, or there is again revealed here the liberal dogma of the course-writers[^note-4-1].

> "The inherent vice of capitalism is the unequal sharing of blessings. The inherent virtue of Socialism is the equal sharing of miseries." -- @Churchill1945

The other two ask questions which seem bizarre to me. One, *What makes algorithms that allocate benefits and harms, fair?* introduces the concept of fairness in a place I wouldn't have expected it. Extending Churchill, life isn't fair, so why should we break our necks with angst over our technical systems? Perhaps this is a matter of degree: we none of us particularly would disadvantage a citizen in, say, the allocation of health benefits for the colour of their skin. The final question seems also to be naïve, *What are the principles that tech giants apply when they influence how our attention and income should be distributed?*, the answer to which is simple and obvious enough: *maximize the shareholders' ROI*.

[Professor Michael Rovatsos](https://www.ed.ac.uk/profile/dr-michael-rovatsos) in his introduction to the week describes as utopian, a vision of the future which sounded to me more like a chapter from @Huxley1955 in its horror. I have to wonder who funds his research. He offers a dichotomy between "digital communism" and "surveilance capitalism". He goes on, citing Marx as principle:

> "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs!" -- @Marx1875

At this point, I feel deeply uncomfortable with this course and the intentions of the authors. It is for me now nothing more than propaganda dressed as academic disinterest. I'm going to stop here.

[^note-4-1]: Wealth distribution is arguably an ethical matter only in the political view of socialists.
